---
title: "Learning From Reflection and Looking to the Future"
description: "Two Years on from the UN Report on Freedom of Religion or Belief and Indigenous Peoples"
categories:
  - blog
  - jcreor
  - link
tags:
  - Law
  - religion
  - values
  - indigenous
  - journal
  - jcreor
link: https://creor-ejournal.library.mcgill.ca/article/view/126
---
Abstract
------------------

The following article discusses the UN Special Interim Report and its significance to the rights of Indigenous Peoples. The article reviews how the *UN Special Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief* has been used as a critical tool for promoting and protecting the rights of Indigenous Peoples globally by emphasizing the need for meaningful engagement with Indigenous individuals and communities in decision-making processes, notably on issues that affect their traditional lands, waters and resources and their spiritual practices. The article also discusses how the UN Special Interim Report was developed through extensive consultations with Indigenous Peoples, community groups, and various stakeholders with the scope of revealing the challenges faced by Indigenous Peoples. Finally, the article will reflect upon the positive responses generated by the Report and the ongoing discourse to encourage further engagement with the findings.

Author Biographies
------------------

### Ahmed Shaheed, University of Essex

Dr. Shaheed is Professor of International Human Rights Law in the School of Law and Human Rights Centre at the University of Essex. He directs the Human Rights Centre's Religion and Equality Project, Project on Mobilising A Global Alliance to Counter islamophobia, and the Essex Summer School on Human Rights Research and Practice. He serves as an adviser on 'hate speech' to the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and is a member of the Panel of Experts on Freedom of Religion or Belief convened by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe. He served as the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief from 2016 to 2022 having previously served as the UN Special Rapporteur on human rights in Iran from 2011 to 2016. Hailing from the Maldives, Ahmed served as Foreign Minister of Maldives between 2005 and 2010, member of the Constitutional Assembly from 2004 to 2007, and led the government's efforts to fast-track human rights and governance reforms between 2003 and 2007, which led to the transition to democracy in 2008. He is the founding chair of the Geneva-based think-tank, Universal Rights Group and is a Senior Fellow of the Raoul Wallenberg Centre for Human Rights in Montreal.

### Jennifer Tridgell, University of Cambridge

Jennifer Tridgell is an Australian public international lawyer, with particular expertise in human rights, international dispute settlement and diplomacy. She works as an Independent Consultant and a PhD Candidate at the University of Cambridge as a prestigious Ramsay World Postgraduate Scholar. Previously, Jennifer served as Senior Legal Advisor to the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief (External Office), Dr Ahmed Shaheed, where she advised on activities that increased impact and visibility of his global mandate and led on research and development of his official reports, including on Indigenous Peoples. Jennifer is well-versed in human rights and other international law issues across different jurisdictions, having worked for leading international firms, international and domestic judges, National Human Rights Institutions and several human rights organisations across the Asia-Pacific region, including those furthering rights of Indigenous Peoples.